Climate Change “Change is the Law of Nature” Climate Change is a
reality. It has changed in Past, is changing in Present and will change
in Future. Atmosphere is always in a state of turmoil and instability
leading to variation in weather and climatic conditions. Thus the
variation and shifts in weather conditions over space and time of
different scales and magnitude resulting into changes of Climatic Type
is defined as Climate Change. For example, from warm and moist climate
to warm and dry climate. The rate of climatic changes depends on the
nature of causal factor. This may be gradually or rapidly, partly or
drastically, short term or long term, Local, regional, or global scale.
The Climate change which occurred during Jurassic Period leading to mass
extinction of Dinosaurs due to sudden onset of Cold Climate was rapid
and instantaneous. Factors Factors Factors Factors affecting Climate C
affecting Climate C affecting Climate C affecting Climate Change hange
hange hange Earth’s temperature is influence by the energy entering and
leaving the planet’s system. When incoming energy from the sun is
absorbed by the Earth system, Earth is warmed. When the sun’s energy is
reflected back into space, Earth cools. Both natural and anthropogenic
factors can cause changes in Earth’s energy balance. Natural Factors The
Earth’s climate can be affected by a number of natural factors. The
prominent ones are continental drift, volcanoes, ocean currents, the
earth’s tilt, and comets and meteorites. The natural factors affect the
climate change in a long term and persist for thousand to millions of
years. Continental drift  The continents, what we are seeing today, were
not alike before 200 million years. It is formed when the landmass began
gradually drifting apart millions of years back, due to Plate
displacement.  This drift also had an impact on the climate because it
changed the physical features of the landmass, their position and the
position of water bodies like changed the flow of ocean currents and
winds, which affected the climate.  The drift process is still continued
today, the Himalayan range is rising by about 1 mm (millimetre) every
year because the Indian land mass is moving towards the Asian land mass,
slowly but steadily. Variation in the earth’s orbit  The seasonal
distribution of sunlight reaching the Earth’s surface is directly
related to Earth’s Orbit and a slight variation in Earth’s orbit leads
to variation in distribution across the globe.  There are very little
changes to the annually averaged sunshine; but there can be strong
changes in the geographical and seasonal distribution.  There are three
types of orbital variations namely variations in Earth’s eccentricity,
changes in the tilt angle of Earth’s axis of rotation and precession of
Earth’s axis. Combined together, these produce Milankovitch cycles which
have large impact on climate and are notable for their correlation to
glacial and interglacial periods. The IPCC finding shows that
Milankovitch cycles drove the ice age cycles. Plate tectonics  Due to
temperature variation in the core of the Earth, the mantle plumes and
convection currents force the Plates of the Earth to adjust which causes
the reconfiguration of the earth Plate. This can affect both global and
local patterns of climate and atmosphere.  The position of the
continents also influences patterns of ocean circulation as it
determines the geometry of the oceans. The locations of the seas are
important in controlling the transfer of heat and moisture across the
globe, and therefore, in determining global climate.  A recent example
of tectonic control on ocean circulation is the formation of the Isthmus
of Panama about 5 million years ago, which shut off direct mixing
between the Atlantic and pacific oceans. Volcanic activity  When the
Volcano erupts, the outburst of gases and dust particles partially block
the incoming rays of the Sun which lead to the cooling of the weather. 
Sulphur dioxide combines with the water to form tiny droplets of
Sulphuric acid and these droplets are so small that many of them can
stay aloft for several years.  Although the volcanic activity may last
only a few days yet the large volumes of gases and ash can influence the
climatic pattern over the several years. Ocean currents  Ocean currents
are the major component of the climatic system which is driven by the
horizontal wind forces causing the displacement of the water against the
sea surface. Due to temperature variation of the water, the climate of
the region is largely influenced.  On longer time scales, alterations to
ocean processes such as thermohaline circulation play a key role in
redistributing heat by carrying out a very slow and extremely deep
movement deep of water, and the long term redistribution of heat in the
world’s ocean.  Much of the heat that escapes from the oceans is in the
form of water vapour, the most abundant green house gases on the earth.
Yet, water vapour also contributes to the formation of the clouds, which
shade the surfaces and have a net cooling effect. Anthropogenic (Human
Caused) Factors Anthropogenic or manmade factors result in short term
climatic changes. It involves the changes in the energy balance of the
Earth - atmosphere system leading to changes in weather and climate.
Scientists have been observing a change in the climate since the
beginning of the 20th Century that cannot be attributed to any of the
‘natural’ influences of the past. Global warming has occurred faster
than any other climate change recorded by humans and so is of great
interest and importance to the human population. Cause of anthropogenic
(human caused) climate change includes greenhouse gases, aerosols and
pattern of land use changes. Greenhouse Gases The Earth is endowed with
a natural greenhouse effect where certain gases (known as greenhouse
gases) in the atmosphere permit the sunlight to enter but absorb the
heat radiation. They keep the average surface temperature on Earth
around 14°C. Without the natural greenhouse effect, the Earth’s average
surface temperature would be around -19°C. As the human activity has
increased due to onset of industrial revolution, the emission of huge
amount of Green House Gases is also increased which led to more
absorption of heat being retained in the atmosphere thus an increase in
global Temperature. Green house gases while largely transparent to
incoming solar radiation, absorbs most of the infrared emitted by the
earth’s surface. The main greenhouse gases include:  Water vapour: It is
the most abundant greenhouse gas (GHG), however it spends just a short
time in the atmosphere. The amount of water vapour varies drastically
with time, region and altitude. It is not considered the most important
GHG.  Carbon dioxide (CO2): It is the most important GHG and is produced
both naturally and through human activities. Naturally CO2 is released
into the atmosphere through volcanic eruptions and animal respiration.
It is also released through human activities such as deforestation and
the burning of fossil fuels for energy. CO2 spends a long time in the
atmosphere increasing its impact. Since the industrial revolution,
humans have increased atmospheric CO2 concentration by 30%.
Deforestation contributes to global warming as fewer plants are
available to take up carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.  Methane: The
large sources of Methane come from the decomposition of organic matter
e.g. in landfills and in agriculture and from the digestion of ruminants
(cows, goats etc). It is a stronger GHG than CO2 because it can absorb
more heat. However it is much less abundant in the atmosphere.  Nitrous
oxide: It is considered as a very powerful greenhouse gas which is
abundantly produced in the agriculture sector, specifically in the
production and use of organic fertilizers. It is also produced when
burning fossil fuels.  Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs): These man-made
compounds were produced for industrial use, mainly in refrigerants and
air conditioners. They are now regulated under the Montreal Protocol due
to their adverse effect on the Ozone Layer. Country-wise share of
Greenhouse gases The overall warming from 1850 to the end of the 20th
century was equivalent to about 2.5 W/m². CO2 contributed around 60 per
cent of this figure and CH4 about 25 per cent, with N2O and halocarbons
providing the remainder. This has resulted in Earth’s average
temperature increasing from 15.5°C to 16.2°C in the last 100 years. The
warming effect that would result from a doubling of CO2 from
pre-industrial levels is estimated to be 4 W/m². Atmospheric Aerosols
Atmospheric aerosols affect climate in two important ways: • they cause
scattering and absorbing the solar and infrared radiation • they change
the microphysical and chemical properties of clouds and possibly their
lifetime and extent The scattering of solar radiation cools the planet,
while absorption of solar radiation by aerosols act to warm the air
directly instead of allowing sunlight to be absorbed by the surface of
the Earth. Aerosols have the ability to influence climate directly by
absorbing or reflecting incoming solar radiation, but they can also
produce indirect effects on climate by modifying cloud formation or
cloud properties. Aerosols can be transported thousands of kilometres
from the sources of origin by winds and upper level circulation in the
atmosphere. There are two types of aerosols: 1. Natural Aerosols: These
forms of aerosols include windblown mineral dust generated in arid and
semi- arid region. Other natural sources of aerosols include volcanic
eruptions, which produces sulphate aerosols and biogenic sources
(e.g. Phytoplankton) which produce dimethyl sulphide. Other important
biogenic aerosols such as tarpenes are produces naturally by certain
kinds of trees or other plants. 2. Anthropogenic aerosols: Human
activity has increased the amount of aerosols in the atmosphere in
several ways. Ammonia which is often used in Fertilizers or released by
the burning of plants and other organic materials is the prominent
source of Nitrate aerosols. The burning of coal and oil produces sulphur
dioxide which is another major source of sulphate aerosols. Dust is
often a bi-product of agricultural processes. Biomass burning releases a
combination of organic droplets and soot particles. Industrial processes
release a wide variety of aerosols. Exhaust emissions from transport
generate a rich cocktail of pollutants that are either aerosols from the
outset, or are converted by chemical reactions in the atmosphere to form
aerosols. The concentrations of aerosols are about three times higher in
the Northern Hemisphere than in the Southern Hemisphere. This higher
concentration is estimated to result in radiation forcing that is about
50 per cent higher for the Northern Hemisphere. Land use change  Cutting
down forests to create farmland led to changes in the amount of sunlight
reflected from the ground back into space (the surface albedo). About
half of the land use changes are estimated to have occurred during the
industrial era, much of it due to replacement of forests by agricultural
cropping and grazing lands over Eurasia and North America.  High
Latitudes region is largely affected due to deforestation as the albedo
of snow-covered land, previously forested, has increased. This is
because snow on trees reflects only about half of the sunlight falling
on it, whereas snow-covered open ground reflects about two-thirds.
Overall, the increased albedo over Eurasian and North American
agricultural regions has had a cooling effect.  Tropical deforestation
which changes evapotranspiration rates (the amount of water vapour put
into the atmosphere through evaporation and transpiration from trees),
desertification, which increases surface albedo, and the general effects
of agriculture on soil moisture characteristics.  Analysing the surface
records of changing land use with satellite measurements of the
properties of vegetation cover show that forest clearing for agriculture
and irrigated farming in arid and semi-arid lands are two major sources
of climatically important land cover changes.  The two effects however,
to cancel out, because irrigated agriculture increases solar energy
absorption and the amount of moisture evaporated into the atmosphere,
whereas forest clearing decreases these two processes. Impact Impact
Impact Impacts s s s of Climate Change of Climate Change of Climate
Change of Climate Change Rising global temperature is accompanied by the
changes in weather and climate like changes in rainfall, resulting in
more floods, droughts, or intense rain, as well as more frequent and
severe heat waves. The planet’s oceans and glaciers have also
experienced some big changes - oceans are warming and becoming more
acidic, ice caps are melting, and sea levels are rising. As these
changes become more pronounced in the coming decades, they poses a great
challenge to our society and our environment. Higher Temperatures  Green
House gases release by power plants, automobiles, deforestation and
other sources are heating up the planet. In fact, the five hottest years
on record have all occurred since 1997 and the 10 hottest since 1990,
including the warmest years on record – 2005 and 2010.  Increased
temperatures are to blame for an increase in heat-related deaths and
illness, rising seas, increased storm intensity, and many of the other
dangerous consequences of climate change.  During the 20th century, the
Earth’s average temperature has increased by one degree Fahrenheit to
its highest level in the past four centuries – believed to be the
fastest rise in a thousand years.  Research found that if emissions of
heat-trapping carbon emissions aren’t reduced, average surface
temperatures could increase by 3 to 10 degrees Fahrenheit by the end of
the century. Changing Landscapes  Increasing temperatures and changing
patterns of rain and snow have resulted in moving of trees and plants
around the world toward Polar Regions and up mountain slopes.  These
vegetation shifts will affect much of the work the conservation
community has accomplished to date, with the potential to permanently
change the face of Conservancy preserves, local land trusts, and even
our national parks.  As plant communities try to adapt the changing
climate by moving toward cooler areas, the animals that depend on them
will be forced to move in order to survive.  Some species and
communities such as polar bears and alpine meadows may be left without
any remaining viable habitat, putting much of our treasured wildlife at
risk. Wildlife/Ecosystem at Risk  Increased temperatures are changing
weather and vegetation patterns across the globe, forcing animal species
to migrate to new, cooler areas in order to survive.  The rapid change
of climate change is likely to exceed the ability of many species to
migrate or adjust. Experts predict that one-fourth of Earth’s species
will be headed for extinction by 2050 if the warming trend continues at
its current rate. Many species are already feeling the heat: o In 1999,
the death of the last Golden Toad in Central America marked the first
documented species extinction driven by climate change. o Due to melting
ice in the Arctic, polar bears may be gone from the planet in as little
as 100 years. o In the tropics, rising the sea temperatures are causing
more coral reefs to “bleach,” as the heat kills colourful algae that are
necessary to coral health and survival. Ocean Acidification /Rising Seas
level  As the Earth heats up, sea levels rise up because warmer water
takes up more area than colder water, a process known as thermal
expansion. Melting glaciers compound the problem by dumping even more
fresh water into the oceans.  Rising seas threaten the populated
low-lying areas, islands and dense coastal populations, erode
shorelines, damage property and destroy ecosystems such as mangroves and
wetlands that protect coasts against storms.  Sea levels have risen
between four and eight inches in the past 100 years. Current projections
suggest that sea levels could continue to rise between 4 inches and 36
inches over the next 100 years.  The increased concentration of carbon
dioxide (CO2) in the atmosphere has increased the absorption of CO2 in
the ocean, which reduces the pH and makes the oceans more acidic.  A
more acidic ocean would adversely affect the health of many marine
species, including plankton, molluscs, and other shellfish. In
particular, corals can be very sensitive to rising acidity, as it is
difficult for them to create and maintain the skeletal structures needed
for their support and protection. Increased Risk of Drought, Fire and
Floods  Higher temperatures increase the amount of moisture that
evaporates from land and water, leading to drought in many areas. Lands
affected by drought are more vulnerable to flooding once rain falls.  As
temperatures rise globally, droughts will become more frequent and more
severe, with potentially devastating consequences for agriculture, water
supply and human health. This phenomenon has already been observed in
some parts of Asia and Africa, where droughts have become longer and
more intense.  Hot temperatures and dry conditions also increase the
likelihood of forest fires. Intensified Storms and Increased Storm
Damages  Scientific research indicates that climate change will cause
hurricanes and tropical storms to become more intense — lasting longer,
unleashing stronger winds, and causing more damage to coastal ecosystems
and communities.  Higher ocean temperatures is the main culprit, since
hurricanes and tropical storms get their energy from warm water. As sea
surface temperatures rise, developing storms will contain more energy. 
At the same time, other factors such as rising sea levels, disappearing
wetlands, and increased coastal development threaten to intensify the
damage caused by hurricanes and tropical storms. Illness and Disease  As
temperatures increases, so do the risks of heat-related illness and even
death for the most vulnerable human populations. Scientists have linked
the deadly heat waves to climate change and warn of more to come.  In
2003, for example, extreme heat waves caused more than 20,000 deaths in
Europe and more than 1,500 deaths in India.  Climate change increases
the spread of infectious diseases, mainly because warmer temperatures
allow disease-carrying insects, animals and microbes to survive in areas
where they were once blocked by cold weather.  Diseases and pests that
were once limited to the tropics — such as mosquitoes that carry malaria
— may find hospitable conditions in new areas that were once too cold to
support them.  The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that
climate change may have caused more than 150,000 deaths in the year 2000
alone, with an increase in deaths likely in the future. Economic Losses 
Research says that if no action is taken to curtail the global carbon
emissions, climate change could cost between 5 and 20 percent of the
annual global gross domestic product. In comparison, it would take 1
percent of GDP to lessen the most damaging effects of climate change. 
Climate change may significantly lower lake levels, altering shoreline
habitats and costing millions for the relocation of ports and shore
infrastructure.  Globally, more intense hurricanes and downpours could
cause billions of dollars in damage to property and infrastructure. 
Declining crop yields due to prolonged drought and high temperatures,
especially in Africa, could put hundreds of thousands of people at risk
for starvation.  High sea temperatures also threaten the survival of
coral reefs, which generate an estimated $375 billion per year in goods
and services. Agriculture Productivity/Food Security  Solar radiation,
temperature, and precipitation are the essential drivers of crop growth;
therefore agriculture has always been highly dependent on climate
patterns and variations.  Since the industrial revolution, humans have
been changing the global climate by emitting huge amounts of greenhouse
gases into the atmosphere, resulting in higher global temperatures,
affecting hydrological regimes and increasing climatic variability. 
Climate change is projected to have significant impacts on agricultural
conditions, food supply, and food security. Some of these effects are
biophysical, some are ecological, and some are economic, including: o A
shift in climate and agricultural zones towards the poles o Changes in
production patterns due to higher temperatures o A boost in agricultural
productivity due to increased carbon dioxide in the atmosphere o
Changing precipitation patterns o Increased vulnerability of the
landless and the poor International Efforts to Counter International
Efforts to Counter International Efforts to Counter International
Efforts to Counter Climate Change Climate Change Climate Change Climate
Change The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)  IPCC was
founded in November 1988 by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO)
and the United Nations Environment Program (UNEP) jointly as a place to
study global warming problems at a governmental level.  It is the
mechanism that accumulates scientific knowledge on global warming while
debates on the international countermeasures have been made in the COPs
(Conference of the Parties) of United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC). These two mechanisms are complementing each
other. United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) 
The UNFCCC entered into force on 21 March 1994. The 195 countries that
have ratified the Convention are called Parties to the Convention
(Almost universal Membership).  The UNFCCC is a “Rio Convention”, one of
three adopted at the “Rio Earth Summit” in 1992. Others are the UN
Convention on Biological Diversity and the Convention to Combat
Desertification.  Due to intrinsic linkages, the Joint Liaison Group was
set up to boost cooperation among the three Conventions, and synergies
in their activities on issues of mutual concern. It now also
incorporates the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands.  The ultimate objective
of the Convention is to stabilize greenhouse gas concentrations “at a
level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic (human induced)
interference with the climate system.” It states that “such a level
should be achieved within a time-frame sufficient to allow ecosystems to
adapt naturally to climate change, to ensure that food production is not
threatened, and to enable economic development to proceed in a
sustainable manner.”  Following its effectuation, the COP1 was held in
Berlin, COP2 in Geneva, and the COP3 was held in Kyoto to adopt “Kyoto
Protocol”, which implemented the objective of the UNFCCC to fight global
warming by reducing greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere to
‘a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with
the climate system’ (Art. 2). Kyoto Protocol  The Kyoto Protocol commits
its signatories by setting internationally binding emission reduction
targets.  The Kyoto Protocol was adopted in Kyoto, Japan, on 11 December
1997 and entered into force on 16 February 2005. The detailed rules for
the implementation of the Protocol were adopted at COP 7 in Marrakesh,
Morocco, in 2001, and are referred to as the “Marrakesh Accords.” Its
first commitment period started in 2008 and ended in 2012.  Recognizing
that developed countries are principally responsible for the current
high levels of GHG emissions in the atmosphere as a result of more than
150 years of industrial activity, the Protocol places a heavier burden
on developed nations under the principle of “common but differentiated
responsibilities.”  When no Protocol exists, the global CO2 emission in
2010 will increase by 24% compared with 1990. When the Protocol is
enforced in 2000, the global CO2 emission in 2010 will reduce by 5.2%
compared with 1990.  Parties to the Kyoto protocol are classified as: o
Annex I: Parties to the UNFCCC listed in Annex I of the Convention.
These are the industrialized (developed) countries and “economies in
transition” (EITs). EITs are the former centrally-planned (Soviet)
economies of Russia and Eastern Europe. The European Union-15 (EU-15) is
also an Annex I Party. o Annex II: Parties to the UNFCCC listed in Annex
II of the Convention. Annex II Parties are made up of members of the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). Annex II
Parties are required to provide financial and technical support to the
EITs and developing countries to assist them in reducing their
greenhouse gas emissions (climate change mitigation) and manage the
impacts of climate change (climate change adaptation). o Annex B:
Parties listed in Annex B of the Kyoto Protocol are Annex I Parties with
first or second round Kyoto greenhouse gas emissions targets. o
Non-Annex I: Parties to the UNFCCC not listed in Annex I of the
Convention are mostly low-income developing countries. Developing
countries may volunteer to become Annex I countries when they are
sufficiently developed. o Least-developed countries (LDCs): 49 Parties
are LDCs, and are given special status under the treaty in view of their
limited capacity to adapt to the effects of climate change. 
Industrialized countries (Annex I) have to report regularly on their
climate change policies and measures, including issues governed by the
Kyoto Protocol (for countries which have ratified it). They must also
submit an annual inventory of their greenhouse gas emissions, including
data for their base year (1990) and all the years since.  Developing
countries (Non-Annex I Parties) report in more general terms on their
actions both to address climate change and to adapt to its impacts - but
less regularly than Annex I Parties do, and their reporting is
contingent on their getting funding for the preparation of the reports,
particularly in the case of the Least Developed Countries.  Kyoto
Mechanisms are also known as Flexible Mechanisms and they include
Emissions Trading, the Clean Development Mechanism and Joint
Implementation to lower the cost of achieving emission targets. 
Emission Trading: Emissions Trading‐mechanism allows parties to the
Kyoto Protocol to buy ‘Kyoto units’ (emission permits for greenhouse
gas) from other countries to help meet their domestic emission reduction
targets.  Joint Implementation: Any Annex I country can invest in
emission reduction projects (referred to as “Joint Implementation
Projects”) in any other Annex I country as an alternative to reducing
emissions domestically.  Clean Development Mechanism (CDM): Countries
can meet their domestic emission reduction targets by buying greenhouse
gas reduction units from (projects in) non Annex I countries to the
Kyoto protocol.  Kyoto Units: The emissions trading can be international
or domestic. Under the International Emissions Trading (IET), the
countries can trade in the international carbon credit market to cover
their shortfall in Assigned amount units. Countries with surplus units
can sell them to countries that are exceeding their emission targets
under Annex B of the Kyoto Protocol.  Certified Emission Reductions
(CERs): Certified Emission Reductions are one of the types of the Kyoto
Units. They are issued under the Clean Development Mechanism. The
Annex‐I countries can use the CERs to comply with their emission
limitation targets or by operators of installations covered by the
European Union Emission Trading Scheme (EU ETS) in order to comply with
their obligations to surrender EU Allowances, CERs or Emission Reduction
Units (ERUs) for the CO2 emissions of their installations. The
Government and Private entities can hold the CERs on electronic accounts
with the UN.  In Doha, Qatar, on 8 December 2012, the “Doha Amendment to
the Kyoto Protocol” was adopted. The amendment includes: o New
commitments for Annex I Parties to the Kyoto Protocol who agreed to take
on commitments in a second commitment period from 1 January 2013 to 31
December 2020; o A revised list of greenhouse gases (GHG) to be reported
on by Parties in the second commitment period; and o Amendments to
several articles of the Kyoto Protocol which specifically referenced
issues pertaining to the first commitment period and which needed to be
updated for the second commitment period.  The Kyoto Protocol is seen as
an important first step towards a truly global emission reduction regime
that will stabilize GHG emissions, and can provide the architecture for
the future international agreement on climate change.  In Durban (2011),
the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Durban Platform for Enhanced Action
(ADP) was established to develop a protocol, another legal instrument or
an agreed outcome with legal force under the Convention, applicable to
all Parties. The ADP is to complete its work as early as possible, but
no later than 2015, in order to adopt this protocol, legal instrument or
agreed outcome with legal force at the twenty-first session of the
Conference of the Parties and for it to come into effect and be
implemented from 2020. Conference of parties to the Kyoto Protocol
Conferences Outcome/Breakthrough COP 16 16th session of the Conference
of the Parties (COP 16) to the UNFCCC and the 6th session of the CMP 6
to the Kyoto Protocol was held in in Cancun, Mexico in 2010. • Called
for a large “Green Climate Fund”, and a “Climate Technology Centre” and
network. • It looked forward to a second commitment period for the Kyoto
Protocol. • The agreement recognizes that climate change represents an
urgent and potentially irreversible threat to human societies and the
planet, which needs to be urgently addressed by all parties. COP 17 17th
session of the Conference of the Parties (COP 17) to the UNFCCC and the
7th session of the CMP 7 to the Kyoto Protocol was held in Durban, South
Africa in 2011. • The conference led to agreement on a management
framework for a future Green Climate Fund. The fund is to distribute
US$100bn per year to help poor countries adapt to climate impacts. • The
design of the new Green Climate Fund for developing countries was
completed through a decision on its governance and other practical
arrangements. This opens the way for the Fund to become operational in
2012. • The conference decided that the second commitment period will
start on 1 January 2013 and run until 2017 or 2020. The end date and the
emission targets for developed countries taking part will be fixed at
the UN climate conference to be held at the end of 2012 in Qatar. • The
EU confirmed it will participate in the second period of the Protocol
beginning in 2013. COP 18 18th session of the Conference of the
Parties(COP 18) to the UNFCCC and the 8th session of the CMP 8 to the
Kyoto Protocol was held at the Qatar National Convention Centre in Doha
in 2012 • Doha finalised details of the second Kyoto period and agreed a
work plan for negotiations on the new global agreement and on raising
ambition under the Durban Platform. • operationalised the Technology
Mechanism established in Cancun by agreeing the governance arrangements
for the Technology Executive Committee and a Climate Technology Centre
and Network; • Launched a work programme to elaborate modalities and
procedures for the new market mechanism established in Durban. COP 19
19th session of the Conference of the Parties(COP 19) to the UNFCCC and
the 9th session of the CMP 9 to the Kyoto Protocol was held in Warsaw,
Poland in 2013 • The Warsaw conference agreed a time plan for countries
to table their contributions to reducing or limiting greenhouse gas
emissions under the new global climate agreement in 2015. • It also
agreed ways to accelerate efforts to deepen emission cuts over the rest
of this decade, and to set up a mechanism to address losses and damage
caused by climate change in vulnerable developing countries. • The
conference agreed decisions which enhance the implementation of a range
of measures already agreed, including climate finance, REDD+, and
transparency of reporting on emissions. COP 20 20th session of the
Conference of the Parties (COP 20) to the UNFCCC and the 10th session of
the CMP 10 to the Kyoto Protocol was held in Lima, Peru, in 2014 •
Nations concluded by elaborating the elements of the new agreement,
scheduled to be agreed in Paris in late 2015, while also agreeing the
ground rules on how all countries can submit contributions to the new
agreement during the first quarter of next year. • These Intended
Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs) will form the foundation for
climate action post 2020 when the new agreement is set to come into
effect. • Pledges were made by both developed and developing countries
prior to and during the COP that took the capitalization of the new
Green Climate Fund (GCF) past an initial $10 billion target. • Levels of
transparency and confidence-building reached new heights as several
industrialized countries submitted themselves to questioning about their
emissions targets under a new process called a Multilateral Assessment.
• The Lima Ministerial Declaration on Education and Awareness-raising
calls on governments to put climate change into school curricula and
climate awareness into national development plans. Reducing Emissions
from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD)  Reducing Emissions
from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD) is a set of steps
designed to use market/financial incentives in order to reduce the
emissions of greenhouse gases from deforestation and forest degradation.
Its original objective is to reduce green house gases but it is claimed
that it can deliver “co-benefits” such as biodiversity conservation and
poverty alleviation.  “Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest
degradation” implies a distinction between the two activities.
Deforestation is the permanent removal of forests and withdrawal of land
from forest use. Forest degradation refers to negative changes in the
forest area that limit its production capacity.  REDD is sometimes
presented as an “offset” scheme of the carbon markets and thus, would
produce carbon credits.  Main Actors: REDD activities are undertaken by
national or local governments, dominant NGOs, the private sector, or any
combination of these. It is being pushed strongly by the World Bank and
the UN for setting up the bases for the carbon market and the legal and
governance frameworks of countries receiving REDD. Carbon offsets are
“emissions-saving projects or programmes” that in theory would
“compensate” for the polluters’ emissions. The “carbon credits”
generated by these projects could then be used by industrialised
governments and corporations to meet their targets and/or to be traded
within the carbon markets. REDD ++  “REDD+” goes beyond deforestation
and forest degradation, and includes the role of conservation,
sustainable management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon
stocks.  It is predicted that financial flows for greenhouse gas
emission reductions from REDD+ could reach up to US$30 billion a year.
This significant North-South flow of funds could reward a meaningful
reduction of carbon emissions and could also support new, pro-poor
development, help conserve biodiversity and secure vital ecosystem
services.  Further, maintaining forest ecosystems can contribute to
increased resilience to climate change. To achieve these multiple
benefits, REDD+ will require the full engagement and respect for the
rights of Indigenous Peoples and other forest-dependent communities. US
– China sign pact on emission reductions  China and the United States in
November 2014 agreed on a timetable to limit emission of greenhouse
gases.  In a joint announcement, the U.S. agreed to reduce by 2025 its
emission of greenhouse gases by 26 per cent to 28 per cent below its
2005 level.  China stated its intent to peak emissions of carbon dioxide
in 2030, if not earlier. It also agreed to raise the share of non-fossil
fuels to 20 per cent, in its primary energy mix, in the next 16 years.
This would entail China shifting towards clean energy generated by
nuclear, wind, solar and such zero-emitting resources.  The agreement on
a timetable for emission cuts to combat climate change has brightened
prospects for a climate deal in Paris next year.  The joint announcement
could impose fresh pressure on India not to become a deal breaker in the
run up to the Paris talks. India’s per capita emissions are estimated at
one-tenth of the United States and one-fourth of China. HFCs as
greenhouse gases  Hydroflurocarbons (HFCs) are intentionally made
fluorinated greenhouse gases used as replacements for ozone-depleting
substances. HFCs are used in the same applications where ozone-depleting
substances have been used: refrigeration, air-conditioning equipment
etc.  Since HFCs are not ozone-depleting, they have been kept out of the
Montreal Protocol that currently deals with phasing out ozone depleting
substances like hydro-chlorofluorocarbon (HCFC) and chlorofluorocarbons
(CFC). HFCs, on the other hand, contribute to global warming and come
under Kyoto Protocol.  In the recent United Nations Climate Change
Conference that was held in Bonn, the UNEP expressed its view that the
HFCs are a part of Short Lived Climate Pollutants (SLCPs) but have
higher global warming potential when compared to carbon dioxide. Many of
the western countries led by US are of the view that HFCs should be
dealt under Montreal protocol and the use of HFCs should be reduced. 
India, however, refused to be part of it. If HFC comes under the
Montreal Protocol, it would be binding on emerging economies, including
India, to go for phasing it out in an agreed time-bound legal framework.
India has consistently maintained that the country will not phase out
HFC unless there is availability of safe and economically-viable
alternatives. India has demanded for technology transfer without patent
restriction, financial assistance, and allowing developing countries,
including India, more time for phasing down HFCs. India’ India’ India’
India’s Effort Effort Effort Effort to Counter Climate Change to Counter
Climate Change to Counter Climate Change to Counter Climate Change 
India is the world’s third largest economy and fifth largest greenhouse
gas (GHG) emitter, accounting for about 5% of global emissions. India’s
emissions increased 65% between 1990 and 2005 and are projected to grow
another 70% by 2020.  By other measures, India’s emissions are low
compared to those of other major economies. India accounts for only 2%
of cumulative energy-related emissions since 1850. On a per capita
basis, India’s emissions are 70% below the world average and 93% below
those of the United States.  India is also at the frontlines of facing
the impacts of climate change. Shifting rainfall patterns, recurring
floods, stronger cyclones and droughts or soil erosion are exacerbating
the challenge of poverty eradication and necessitate the allocation of
scarce national resources for preventing loss of human life.  Despite
resource constraints, India is undertaking ambitious actions to
undertake adaptation and mitigation actions, including thorough lowering
of the energy intensity of our economic growth, increasing energy
efficiency across sectors and making greater use of renewable.  India
has doubled the Clean Energy Cess on coal, which very few countries
have, and the Clean Energy Fund already has over 3 billion US dollars to
be used for promoting clean technologies  India’s National Solar Mission
is being scaled up five-fold from 20,000 megawatts to 100,000 megawatts.
This will mean an additional investment of 100 billion dollars and
savings of about 165 million tonnes of CO2 emissions per year.  India is
releasing 6 billion US dollars in one go for intensive afforestation
which will result in more carbon sinks.  India has allocated about 200
million US dollars for the ‘National Adaptation Fund’, setting-up of
Ultra Mega Solar Projects, Ultra-Modern Super Critical Coal Based
Thermal Power Technology, and the development of Solar Parks on canals. 
Another initiative is “100 Smart Cities’ with integrated policies for
adaptation and mitigation to reduce the vulnerability and exposure of
urban areas to climate change and also to improve their energy
efficiency for which 1.2 billion US dollars have been allocated.  India
has put in place stringent norms for cement industry. Our Action Plan
for cleaning one of the longest rivers in the world, River Ganga will
bring multiple benefits of pollution reduction and climate adaptation.
We have also taken initiatives for protecting coastal, Himalayan, and
forest areas.  India has initiated preparations to develop a National
Air Quality Index and have launched a National Air Quality Scheme. 
Setting-up of Ultra Mega Solar Projects in Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan,
Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh and Ladakh to promote renewable energy. National
action plan on climate change (NAPCC) Government of India has launched
eight Missions as part of the National Action Plan on Climate Change
(NAPCC) in specific areas which include assessment of the impact of
climate change and actions needed to address climate change. 1. National
Solar Mission:  The NAPCC aims to promote the development and use of
solar energy for power generation and other uses with the ultimate
objective of making solar competitive with fossil-based energy options. 
The plan includes: specific goals for increasing use of solar thermal
technologies in urban areas, industry, and commercial establishments; a
goal of increasing production of photovoltaic to 1000 MW/year; and a
goal of deploying at least 1000 MW of solar thermal power generation. 
Other objectives include the establishment of a solar research centre,
increased international collaboration on technology development,
strengthening of domestic manufacturing capacity, and increased
government funding and international support. 2. National Mission for
Enhanced Energy Efficiency:  Initiatives based on increasing the energy
use efficiency were expected to yield savings of 10,000 MW by 2012. 
Building on the Energy Conservation Act 2001, the plan recommends: o
Mandating specific energy consumption decreases in large
energy-consuming industries, with a system for companies to trade
energy-savings certificates; o Energy incentives, including reduced
taxes on energy-efficient appliances; and o Financing for public-private
partnerships to reduce energy consumption through demand-side management
programs in the municipal, buildings and agricultural sectors. 3.
National Mission on Sustainable Habitat:  To promote energy efficiency
as a core component of urban planning, the plan calls for: o Extending
the existing Energy Conservation Building Code; o A greater emphasis on
urban waste management and recycling, including power production from
waste; o Strengthening the enforcement of automotive fuel economy
standards and using pricing measures to encourage the purchase of
efficient vehicles; and o Incentives for the use of public
transportation. 4. National Water Mission  With water scarcity projected
to worsen as a result of climate change, the plan sets a goal of a 20%
improvement in water use efficiency through pricing and other measures.
5. National Mission for Sustaining the Himalayan Ecosystem  The plan
aims to conserve biodiversity, forest cover, and other ecological values
in the Himalayan region, where glaciers that are a major source of
India’s water supply are projected to recede as a result of global
warming. 6. National Mission for a”Green India”  Goals include the
afforestation of 6 million hectares of degraded forest lands and
expanding forest cover from 23% to 33% of India’s territory. 7. National
Mission for Sustainable Agriculture  The plan aims to support climate
adaptation in agriculture through the development of climate-resilient
crops, expansion of weather insurance mechanisms, and agricultural
practices. 8. National Mission on Strategic Knowledge for Climate Change
To gain a better understanding of climate science, impacts and
challenges, the plan envisions a new Climate Science Research Fund,
improved climate modelling, and increased international collaboration. 
It also encourages private sector initiatives to develop adaptation and
mitigation technologies through venture capital funds. National Action
Programme to Combat Desertification  India is a party to the UN
Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) and MoEF is the National
Coordinating Agency for the implementation of the UNCCD in the country. 
As an affected party, a 20 year comprehensive National Action Programme
(NAP) to combat desertification in the country has been prepared. The
objectives are:- o community based approach to development, o activities
to improve the quality of life of the local communities, o awareness
raising, o drought management preparedness and mitigation, o R&D
initiatives and interventions which are locally suited, o strengthening
self-governance leading to empowerment of local communities  It is
proposed to initiate activities that include, among others, assessment
and mapping of land degradation, drought monitoring and early warning
system groups, drought preparedness contingency plans, and on-farm
research activities for development of indigenous technology etc. will
be taken up. India’s Stand on climate change negotiations  Clean air,
clean energy and clean power balanced with growth were the priorities
for India in its mission to combat climate change. The government had
pursued voluntarily set targets with commitment, conviction and
followed-up action and had played an active and positive role in
tackling the Climate Change.  India’s stand is based on its domestic
obligations of addressing the basic development needs of poverty
eradication, food security and nutrition, universal access to education
and health, gender equality and women empowerment, water and sanitation,
clean energy, employment, sustainable cities and human settlement and
its commitment to fight climate change.  India is of the view that
historical emissions of developed countries as laid down in the
Conventions should be the basis for differentiation. The developing
countries’ need for inclusive growth, sustainable development, poverty
eradication, and energy access to all must be recognized as fundamental
to the approach to differentiation.  India is of the view that
Announcement of contributions for Green Climate Fund (GCF) and its
actual deposit should be ensured by developed countries. GCF could be
used to purchase Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) of climate friendly
technologies. The non-capitalization of the Green Climate Fund was a
matter of concern and could affect the 2015 Climate agreement.  India
grows into a regional power, which can only be accomplished if India is
given sufficient development space to grow its economy and eliminate
poverty. It is in India’s interest to diversify its energy portfolio — a
prospect that can be strengthened with the U.S.’s assistance. The way to
achieve these objectives is to forge an “India exception” at the global
climate talks in Paris; doing so is the only realistic pathway to a
global climate deal and will cement the growing ties between the two
critical actors in an evolving international order. The Way Forward 
Wealthy nations like the U.S., and those of the EU argued that emissions
from developing countries are consistently rising and they need to
commit to more serious emission cuts. A consensus needs to be developed
at the earliest.  The immediate up scaling of ambition in the second
Commitment period of Kyoto Protocol and its early ratification by all
Kyoto Protocol parties would be a step in the right direction. 
Concerning mitigation, distinction enshrined in the Convention between
Annex I (Developed) and non- Annex I (developing) Parties must be
maintained in accordance with the principles of Equity, CBDR and other
provisions of the UN Conventions.  The ‘developing versus developed
country’ schism needs to be diluted at the earliest and Developed
Countries should avoid watering down the CBDR principle envisaged in
earlier agreements. transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without prior
permission of Vision IAS.
